---
title: Column Metadata
description: How to define column metadata on a dataset
copyright: 2017 Nexosis 
layout: default
category: Getting Started
tags: [Reference, Data]
use_codestyles: true
order: 7
---

When [uploading data](sendingdata), [importing data](importingdata), or [starting a session](session), you can specify metadata about the columns in your dataset.  This allows the Nexosis API to better understand how your data should be used and interpreted when running machine learning algorithms.

> Note: Setting column metadata is totally optional.  For simple datasets with a couple of columns, the contents of the columns are inferred, and providing metadata may not make a difference in how the algorithms execute.

----

## Column DataTypes

Setting the column `dataType` property is defining the kind of data that the column contains.  The supported data types are:

- Numeric - Numbers, which can be integers or floats.
- Logical - Boolean values, which can be one of the following pairs of values:
    - `True` - `False`
    - `1` - `0`
    - `On` - `Off`
    - `Yes` - `No`
- Date - Dates or dates and times which should be in [ISO-8601 format](workingwithdates).
- String - Any other data which does not fit into the above categories.  These values can the thought of as labels on a row of data. The data science technique we use is called [One Hot Encoding](https://www.quora.com/What-is-one-hot-encoding-and-when-is-it-used-in-data-science).

----

## Column Roles

While the data type of a column defines what kind of data is in a column, the role of a column defines how that column should be used by the Nexosis API.  These roles can actually be changed depending on what you are trying to learn from your dataset.  The available roles are:

- None - Setting a column role to None means that this column will not be used when generating results.
- Timestamp - Defines the column used for time series algorithms.
- Target - Specifies that this is the column which should be the target of the session.  This is the column that will have results generated by sessions.  Only one target column may be specified at a time.
- Feature - A feature column contains other supporting data that may be related to the target column.  These values provide more information that the Nexosis API is able to use when generating results.

----

## Overriding Roles

Column roles can be specified on both a dataset, and on a session that uses the same dataset.  In this situation, the column roles specified on the session will be used only for that session.  This can be useful when you want to predict the values of different columns in a dataset and use the other columns as features.

> Impact sessions should be started with an override of column roles if the value being tested for impact is defined as a feature in the dataset.  This ensures that the algorithms process the dataset as if the impact feature was not present.  The column which specifies the impact event should be set to a role of `None`.

Refer to the [Specifying Features](specifyingfeatures) tutorial for a more in-depth look at overriding column roles.

----

## Validations and restrictions

Column datatypes and roles must meet some restrictions and validations.  If any of these requirements are not met, you will receive a [400 error response](errorcodes) which details which column has the validation issue, and what that validation restriction is.  These validations ensure that the Nexosis API is able to understand how to use the values in your dataset, and is able to generate accurate results.
